Jehovah intended married couples
to work together.
That’s why Jesus used the expression we find
at Matthew 19:6.
Let’s read this from the Bible
—Matthew 19.
And I’ll give you a moment.
Matthew chapter 19
—now, we’re going to read verse 6.
Now, first of all, Jesus quotes
from Genesis 2:24.
Speaking of married couples, he says:
“So that they are no longer two,
but one flesh.”
Now, you remember, Jehovah
made that comment in the garden of Eden.
But now Jesus adds something
that isn’t in Genesis.
He says: “Therefore, what God has yoked
“[yoked] together,
let no man put apart.”
When we think of a yoke,
we may think of a team of horses
plowing a field or pulling a heavy wagon.
Well, if they pull together,
they can be a powerful force.
The same is true
when family members work together.
Mom, Dad
—you have excellent reasons to work together.
When you work together,
you contribute to the peace of the family.
And think of the effect
it has on the children.
By working together, you’re teaching
that fine young son of yours
how to be a caring husband and father,
and your beautiful daughter how to be
a supportive wife and mother.
But what happens when teammates
begin pulling in opposite directions
or when one puts on the brakes?
Let’s watch a video.
Now, here’s the setup.
For a long time, a sister raised
her two children as a single parent,
and she did a great job of it.
Then she married a very kind brother.
The family has a new head.
Let’s see how well the sister
is adapting to her new role.
The last few weeks of family worship
have been nice,
right?
Yeah.
All these things we ask and pray
in Jesus’ name, Amen.
Amen.
OK, this week . . .
We are in chapter 5.
Yep, that’s right.
And last week, Gabe read, so this week . . .
It’s Sue’s turn.
That’s right.
OK, the point here is
that when it comes . . .
Honey, maybe an illustration would be better.
Um, OK.
It’s like a bird . . .
Well, hopefully I was able to clear that up
for you a little bit, Olivia.
Yeah. Thank you.
Well, actually, Max, that’s not true.
We had an updated understanding
in the recent Watchtower.
Thanks.
I think they went really well, right?
Um, actually . . .
Hey.
Maybe we can talk about it later.
OK.
The sister isn’t a bad person.
But we can ask:
What is she teaching her daughter
about the wife’s role in the family?
And what is her son learning
about taking the lead
as the man of the house?
He hasn’t had a man
in his life for a long time.
Now there is one.
It’s safe to say that the kids
will stand a better chance
of having a successful marriage themselves
when they see their parents pulling together.
A little later, we’ll see how
the husband handles the situation,
and we brothers
are going to want to pay attention.
This is a classic.
Family life is more pleasant when Dad, Mom,
and the kids work together as a team.
The family head is the captain.
He needs to make sure that everyone knows
what goals the family is working toward
and how each one can contribute
toward achieving those goals.
When it’s your family’s turn
to help clean the Kingdom Hall
or a convention venue, for example,
don’t leave the kids at home.
They’re part of the team.
Don’t go there with half the team.
Let them experience the joy
that comes from serving others.
Let them work along with you.
If you’re assigned to clean the restrooms,
don’t complain about it—a very fine example.
Your children will learn that when
there’s work to be done, we just do it.
We aren’t picky about what we will
and will not do.
And we don’t feel
that some jobs are beneath us.
Now, this is in line with Paul’s counsel
found at Philippians 2:3, 4.
Let’s look that up.
It’s good exercise
—Philippians chapter 2,
verses 3, 4.
Now, we’re thinking about the family
as a team here.
It says: “Do nothing out of contentiousness
“or out of egotism,
“but with humility consider
others superior to you,
“as you look out
not only for your own interests,
but also for the interests of others.”
When there’s work to be done,
someone has to do it.
Do I think that I’m so special
that someone else has to look after it?
Some families volunteer
to help with Kingdom Hall maintenance.
When the kids are old enough,
they can work on other projects
like working on an Assembly Hall.
They have a ball!
The friendships that you
and your young people will forge
can last a lifetime.
And here’s a bonus: When the young people
go to a circuit assembly
or a regional convention,
they’ll have good friends to associate with
—both young and old—
people they’ve been working with.
What about working around the house?
Some parents feel that the children
shouldn’t have to help out at all
because they have their schoolwork to do.
But their schoolwork is something
they do for themselves.
How are they contributing
to the welfare of the family?
How are they learning
to serve others unselfishly?
It’s good for a child to feel that he has
an important role in the household
and that people are counting on him.
Think what that does for his self-respect.
A father named Steven said,
“When nothing is expected of them,
“children learn that they
are here to be served,
“and they grow up with a distorted view
of what life will require of them.”
We might ask, Would a young person
with that attitude
even be able to keep a job?
When some in the world lose their job,
they remain unemployed for a long time.
They can’t pay the bills.
Yet, there are job opportunities
all around them,
but they consider those jobs beneath them.
And what’s one of the most annoying traits
an employee can have?
Ask any boss.
When the worker is asked to do something,
he replies,
“That’s not my job.”
Teach your child that anything
that needs to be done
is his job if he’s old enough
and capable of doing it.
How early should parents
start to assign chores to their children?
Some experts have found that children who are
three years old or even younger
can be taught to help out.
They can learn to pick up their toys,
clean up spills, sort laundry.
Older children can vacuum,
wash the car, prepare a meal.
I’m happy to say that many young brothers
here at Bethel
are excellent cooks,
which is often the result
of fine parental training.
Do you remember the video where Caleb
is taught to clean his room
and put away his toys?
That video was a game changer
for many children.
They want to be just like Caleb.
And now when you enter their room,
you can find the bed.
When problems arise,
attack the problem, not each other.
It’s not ‘How can I win?’
but ‘How can we win?’
You’ll see an excellent example of that
in the follow-up video.
Let’s watch.
Hey!
Want some tea?
Sure!
Hey, babe,
you and me, we’re a team, right?
Yeah, of course!
When I read this, I thought about us.
“So that they are no longer two,
but one flesh.”
I know that before, you had to shoulder
everything yourself for so long.
Mm-hmm.
And you did great.
You’ve been raising two beautiful,
spiritual kids on your own.
But now you have me.
Yeah, I do.
So do you think
sometimes we’re not a team?
Well, it’s just that sometimes
during family worship . . .
I get excited, and I jump in. I know!
I’m just so used to doing it
after all these years.
I know you’re not trying to take over.
And listen, I love the way you teach.
I see how you can reach the kids
in ways that I can’t.
Just let me guide it,
and I’ll make sure you can do that.
Thanks, honey. Thanks for your patience.
No, thank you for your patience.
I’m a work in progress,
but we make a great team.
Why don’t we look at what we’re going
to cover before our next family worship?
That sounds great.
Wasn’t that a fine example
of how to attack a problem and not your mate?
No arguments, no raised voices,
no accusations
—the husband had empathy for his wife.
He didn’t question her motives.
He realized that as a single parent,
she’d been taking the lead for a long time.
And notice how she responded
to her husband’s kind counsel.
No doubt it’s going to be easy
for the kids to respect their stepfather,
and they’re going to learn
how a husband and wife
should treat each other
and how they should pull together.
Sometime soon, you might want
to consider these questions:
In what aspects of our marriage
do we work well as a team?
And then, how can we improve?
It pleases Jehovah
when family members work together as a team.
That promotes peace in the family.
And our God is a “God of peace.”
Now Brother John Ekrann
will consider the final talk
of this symposium,
“Follow the Road Map to Family Peace
—Worship Jehovah Together.”